GE Power
POWER SER VICES ENGINEERING TIL 1603-R2
PRODUCT SER VICE 12 FEBRUAR Y 2019
Compliance Category -  C
Timing Code -  5
TECHNICAL INFORMA TION LETTER
R0 EROSION AND W ATER INGESTION RECOMMENDA TIONS
APPLICA TION
All F-class gas turbines excluding 6F.01, 7F.04-200 and 7F.05.
PURPOSE
To advise operators of the inspection and maintenance considerations necessary to mitigate R0 erosion effects, and
to inform them of a new online water wash (OnWW) system that reduces the rate of erosion in the principal area of
concern.  Failure to properly monitor or repair R0 erosion could result in cracking of the R0 blades and risks of
compressor damage.
REASON FOR REVISION
The reason for this revision is to improve the clarity of the recommendations regarding online water wash frequency and mold
inspections for specific F-class compressor configurations.
COMPLIANCE CA TEGOR Y
M - MaintenanceIdentifies maintenance guidelines or best practices for reliable equipment operation.
C - Compliance
RequiredIdentifies the need for action to correct a condition that, if left uncorrected, may result in reduced
equipment reliability or ef ficiency . Compliance may be required within a specific operating time.
A - AlertFailure to comply with the TIL could result in equipment damage or facility damage. Compliance
is mandated within a specific operating time.
S - SafetyFailure to comply with this TIL could result in personal injury . Compliance is mandated within a
specific operating time.
TIMING CODE
1Prior to Unit Startup / Prior to Continued Operation (forced outage condition)
2At First Opportunity (next shutdown)
3Prior to Operation of Af fected System
4At First Exposure of Component
5At Scheduled Component Part Repair or Replacement.
6Next Scheduled Outage
© 2019 General Electric Company
The proprietary information published in this Technical Information Letter is offered to you by GE in considera tion of its ongoing sales and service
relationship with your organization. However , since the operation of your plant involves many factors not within our knowledge, and since operation of the
plant is in your control and ultimate responsibility for its continuing successful operation rests with you, GE specifically disclaims any responsibility for
liability based on claims for damage of any type, i.e. direct, consequential or special that may be alleged to have been incurred as result of applying this
information regardless of whether it is claimed that GE is strictly liable, in breach of contract, in breach of warranty , negligent, or is in other respects
responsible for any alleged injury or damage sustained by your organization as a result of applying this informa tion. This Technical Information Letter
contains proprietary information of General Electric Com pany and is furnished to its customer solely to assist that customer in the installation, testing,
operation and/or maintenance  of the equipment described. This document shall not be reproduced or distributed in whole or in part nor shall its contents be
disclosed to any third party without the written approval of GE Power Services Engineering. All rights reserved.

BACKGROUND DISCUSSION
As the forward-most rotating blade in an F-class gas turbine compressor, the R0 (Rotor stage 0 blade) is the first to
see airborne materials ingested through the inlet (see Figure 1).  In addition to solid objects that may create
immediate and substantial impact damage, ingested fluids and liquid droplets may also affect the blades, though
more gradually, accumulating erosion primarily along the leading edge of the R0 (see Figure 2).
 
 
  
 
                Figure 1:  Schematic of Inlet and Forward Compressor
Common sources of water ingested through the gas turbine compressor inlet during operation include OnWW,
fogging/SPRITS system output, and evaporative cooling system carry-over.  Water ingestion could also result from
unintended sources such as the leakage of rainwater through compromised inlet ducting seals or malfunctioning
accessory equipment.
 
 
      Figure 2:  R0 Leading Edge Erosion
Leading edge erosion degrades the blade’s material capability by creating a dense network of surface pits (see
Figure 3) and has resulted in compressor event forced outages, with cracks initiating from erosion pits at the root of
the R0 airfoil.  
This TIL supersedes prior TILs 1303, 1389, 1400 and 1401, and provides consolidated recommendations regarding
monitoring R0 erosion levels and repairing or mitigating such erosion.  Failure to follow these recommendations
could result in excessive erosion, which, in turn, could lead to subsequent cracking and possible liberation of R0
blades with potential downstream damage to the gas turbine. 
© 2019 General Electric Company
The proprietary information published in this Technical Information Letter is offered to you by GE in considera tion of its ongoing sales and service
relationship with your organization. However , since the operation of your plant involves many factors not within our knowledge, and since operation of the
plant is in your control and ultimate responsibility for its continuing successful operation rests with you, GE specifically disclaims any responsibility for
liability based on claims for damage of any type, i.e. direct, consequential or special that may be alleged to have been incurred as result of applying this
information regardless of whether it is claimed that GE is strictly liable, in breach of contract, in breach of warranty , negligent, or is in other respects
responsible for any alleged injury or damage sustained by your organization as a result of applying this informa tion. This Technical Information Letter
contains proprietary information of General Electric Com pany and is furnished to its customer solely to assist that customer in the installation, testing,
operation and/or maintenance  of the equipment described. This document shall not be reproduced or distributed in whole or in part nor shall its contents be
disclosed to any third party without the written approval of GE Power Services Engineering. All rights reserved.

 
 
Figure 3:    Erosion Mold Inspections (no erosion, 7 mils erosion)
RECOMMENDA TIONS
Recommendations for monitoring erosion levels caused by known sources of potential water droplet introduction to
the inlet air stream are given in the following section. The recommended method for erosion quantification is through
mold impressions and GE Power Services provides a process for evaluating these molds.  The accumulation of
erosion may at some point require leading edge surface renewal prior to reaching a degradation limit.  Typically this
activity may be performed at Major Inspection intervals, but additional inspections at regular intervals may be
necessary to confirm a modest degradation rate. Contact your GE Power Services provider for scheduling of this
activity.
On-line Water Wash
Compressor fouling results from the depositing of airborne contaminants onto the compressor flow path surfaces
and it affects a decline in aerodynamic efficiency and, thus, gas turbine performance.  Water washing of the
compressor is necessary to reduce the fouling effects and maintain a desired level of output.  However, water
washing performed on-line inherently injects water droplets into the compressor at a high relative velocity, thereby
creating a source of R0 leading edge erosion.
TIL 1323 advises performing a modification to the original online water wash system to reduce the volume of water
impinging on the R0 leading edge root location (the area susceptible to cracking from erosion).  With this
modification, erosion rates are improved, but still require special maintenance intervals.  GE has now engineered
and validated a new online water wash system that imparts significantly reduced erosion at the R0 root and requires
no maintenance for up to 1000 cumulative hours of washing.  This allows for daily water washing (15 minutes per 48
fired hours) with no R0 erosion maintenance necessary until the scheduled Major Inspection interval.  The new
configuration has been validated through accelerated field testing which confirmed the reduced rate of erosion while
maintaining the same cleaning effectiveness as the baseline system.  The system has been introduced into GE F-
class production as well as retrofitted into field units as a system upgrade.  Contact your GE Power Services
representative for information on this upgrade.
                          Figure 4:  Relocated and Redesigned Spray Nozzles as Part of Upgraded OnWW System
© 2019 General Electric Company
The proprietary information published in this Technical Information Letter is offered to you by GE in considera tion of its ongoing sales and service
relationship with your organization. However , since the operation of your plant involves many factors not within our knowledge, and since operation of the
plant is in your control and ultimate responsibility for its continuing successful operation rests with you, GE specifically disclaims any responsibility for
liability based on claims for damage of any type, i.e. direct, consequential or special that may be alleged to have been incurred as result of applying this
information regardless of whether it is claimed that GE is strictly liable, in breach of contract, in breach of warranty , negligent, or is in other respects
responsible for any alleged injury or damage sustained by your organization as a result of applying this informa tion. This Technical Information Letter
contains proprietary information of General Electric Com pany and is furnished to its customer solely to assist that customer in the installation, testing,
operation and/or maintenance  of the equipment described. This document shall not be reproduced or distributed in whole or in part nor shall its contents be
disclosed to any third party without the written approval of GE Power Services Engineering. All rights reserved.

For current F-class units operating with the original OnWW system (which should be modified per TIL 1323), erosion
levels should be inspected at regular intervals of OnWW by taking mold impressions of the R0 leading-edge root
location.  See “Combined Wet Inlet Operation” for inspection interval information.  Contact your GE Power Services
representative to arrange this inspection.  Mold inspections should be followed by fluorescent penetrant inspection
(FPI) to ensure against existing cracks.
OnWW should be performed based on desired output degradation limits as well as environmental effects to the
forward compressor.  When fouling deposits contain corrosive elements, washing can help minimize corrosive
attack.
General guidelines for OnWW duration and frequency are as follows:
5 minutes per 48 Fired Hours, if standard R0’s and the Gen-1 WW system are in place
15 minutes per 48 Fired Hours, if standard R0’s and the Gen-2 WW system are in place (available through
CM&U)
15 minutes per 48 Fired Hours, if enhanced R0s (ECP 2, 2+3, 4, 5) are installed with either the Gen-1 WW
or the Gen-2 WW system 
 
These durations are advised to balance erosion rates and output degradation.  Shorter durations or longer intervals
between washing may be scheduled at the operator’s discretion based on minimal performance degradation or
corrosion concerns.  Conversely, longer or more frequent water washes could result in a greater rate of erosion,
requiring more frequent repairs.  For this reason, the upgraded OnWW system now available generally limits daily
washes through control system permissives.
Inlet Fogging/SPRITS Operation
Water carry-over into the compressor may originate from inlet fogging systems. These systems introduce water
droplets into the air stream that may coalesce and contribute to R0 leading edge erosion. Erosion rates will vary
based on spray ratio, maintenance practices and operating frequency.
For units utilizing fogging systems, GE recommends that R0 blades be inspected with mold impressions and FPI at
regular intervals of cumulative hours of fogger operation as defined in “Combined Wet Inlet Operation”.
Evaporative Cooler Operation
Though evaporative cooler systems are intended to cool the air and introduce moisture (not water droplets) for
increased mass flow and efficiency, inadvertent water carry-over from this system may affect R0 erosion.  GE
recommends monitoring the evaporative coolers for proper operation and any evidence of water carry-over.  This
evidence may include water stains, puddles, or streaking in the filter inlet house or bell mouth area; deposits on filter
or cycle deck material; or missing, damaged, or misaligned filter or cycle deck material.
Any evidence of water carry-over should be dispositioned and eliminated by GE or the manufacturing vendor.  Refer
to TILs 1285 and 1399 for additional information on evaporative cooler maintenance and annual commissioning.
R0 erosion molds and FPI should be performed between 100 and 300 hours of cumulative operation of the evap
system. For units with identified water carry-over, the inspection should be repeated at this interval or as determined
based on the mold impressions.  If there is no significant erosion and it is continually verified that the evap system is
generating no carry-over, no continual R0 mold inspection is necessary.
Combined Wet Inlet Operation
Many operators may use a combination of water-introducing systems.  R0 erosion inspections should include both
mold impressions and FPI and should be performed when cumulative wet inlet operation time reaches 100 hours as
defined by the following formula:
Combined Wet Time = 4*(OnWW hours[A]) + .1*(OnWW hours[B]) + (Fogger hours[C]) + .2*(SPRITS hours[D]) +
(Evap hours[E])
Where [A] pertains to the legacy OnWW system, [B] pertains to the upgraded OnWW system, [C] applies
for non-GE foggers, [D] applies for GE fogging/SPRITS systems, and [E] applies only if carry-over has been
present or the evaporative cooler system has not been commissioned or maintained per TILs 1285 and 1399.
From this, it can be seen that if an upgraded OnWW system is applied and evaporative coolers have been
commissioned and maintained, then recurring mold inspections are primarily dependent on the accumulation of
Fogging/SPRITS operation. These systems may have significant variability based on manufacturer, vintage, system
tuning and modifications.  As such, following initial inspections, parameters C and D may be adjusted per GE
disposition (see Figure 5).  
© 2019 General Electric Company
The proprietary information published in this Technical Information Letter is offered to you by GE in considera tion of its ongoing sales and service
relationship with your organization. However , since the operation of your plant involves many factors not within our knowledge, and since operation of the
plant is in your control and ultimate responsibility for its continuing successful operation rests with you, GE specifically disclaims any responsibility for
liability based on claims for damage of any type, i.e. direct, consequential or special that may be alleged to have been incurred as result of applying this
information regardless of whether it is claimed that GE is strictly liable, in breach of contract, in breach of warranty , negligent, or is in other respects
responsible for any alleged injury or damage sustained by your organization as a result of applying this informa tion. This Technical Information Letter
contains proprietary information of General Electric Com pany and is furnished to its customer solely to assist that customer in the installation, testing,
operation and/or maintenance  of the equipment described. This document shall not be reproduced or distributed in whole or in part nor shall its contents be
disclosed to any third party without the written approval of GE Power Services Engineering. All rights reserved.